
Larry,

   Here's a first draft of the user's guide to the MDS applet.  I'll put 
   a more polished version on the web soon.  You can see some 
   pictures generated with the applet on 
   http://www.math.utah.edu/~alfeld/MDS/ 
   and http://www.math.utah.edu/~alfeld/MDS/bform.html
   
   Let me know what you think!  I'll try to fix any bugs, and I'm open
   to the suggestion of modifying features or adding new ones.

   Have fun!

   Peter



To activate the applet.

   Click on the box on the web page
   http://www.math.utah.edu/~alfeld/MDS/ 
   
   Two windows will pop up, the control window, and a drawing window.
   The initial triangulation is the Clough-Tocher split.  You can
   change the values of r and d in the third row of the control panel.
   There is one red textfield for r and one for d.  To edit any text
   field move the cursor into the textfield and click (always the left
   mouse button) or highlight part of the text.  Then type the
   insertion or replacement string.  A change in any text window
   becomes effective only after you type RETURN.  The contents of the
   textfields can also be incremented or decremented (by 1) by
   clicking on the "+" and +-" buttons next to the textfield.

Quitting.  

   To quit click on the upper left button (labeled Quit) of the
   control panel.

Constructing a MDS.

   Suppose you want to construct a minimal determining set.  To add a
   point to the set just click on the domain point.  The first time
   you do this some linear algebra will be initialized and any points
   that do not enter the smoothness conditions are added.  The symbols
   you see have the following meaning:

- a fat plus sign: The point is in the MDS

- a white outlined circle: The status of that point is as yet undetermined.

- a filled in circle: That point is implied to be zero by the smoothness
  conditions, based on the points that are currently in the MDS.

- A filled in box: That point does not enter any smoothness conditions
  (and therefore is in the MDS).

- an outlined white box: That point does not enter any smoothness
  conditions and is not included in the current set, because it has
  not been initialized, or it has been taken out for some counting
  or marking purposes.

   Points that are currently in the MDS can also be taken out, by
   clicking on them.  Any points that are implied by the larger set,
   but not by the smaller, revert to their outlined status.

Adding and removing points in groups.

   The menu in the fifth row of the control panel can be used to
   determine the effect of clicking on a point, according to the
   following options:

- point (the default) Add or remove one point at a time.

- ring.  Add or remove all points in the ring containing the target
  point.  To pick the center of the ring click on that vertex first
  (in ring mode).  The default center for the cells is the interior
  point.

- disk.  This works similarly to the ring.

- triangle.  Click on an interior point of a triangle to add or remove
  the entire triangle, or the interior point of an edge to add or
  remove that edge, or a vertex to add or remove that vertex.

   NOTE: Remember to switch back to point mode when done with one of
   the other modes.  You can do this by using the menu on the control
   panel or simply by typing a period in the drawing window.

Adding Color

   The current color can be changed using the second menu in the
   fifth row of the control panel.  The default is black.

Having more than one drawing window.

   You can have several drawing windows at once.  The control window
   always corresponds to one particular drawing window.  The drawing
   windows are numbered.  You pick which one is currently associated
   with the control window by changing the number in the text field in
   the second row of the control panel, the one preceded by the string
   "T =". You can increase or decrease that number by clicking "+" or
   "-" on the buttons next to it.  You can also edit the contents of
   the text window.  The most convenient way of associating the
   control panel with a given triangulation is to type "c" or "C" in
   the relevant drawing window.

Miscellaneous Options

   The following is a list of options available on the control
   panel. not yet discussed:

*** Second Row:

 - New  Clicking on this button brings up a new drawing window,
   with the parameters set to the same value as they are in the
   current drawing window.

 - Hide!  Hides the drawing window currently associated with the
   control panel.

 - Show!  Opens the drawing window currently associated with the
   control panel, and puts it on top of all others.

 - Redraw  Redraws the contents of the current drawing window.

 - Reset Resets the contents of the current drawing window.  The
   triangulation and the values of r and d remain unchanged.  Starting
   a new MDS requires reinitialization of the linear algebra.

*** Third Row.  The third row is dedicated to the control of r and d.

*** Fourth Row:

- MDS Assigns the currently chosen color to all points currently in
  the MDS.

- DET Assigns the currently chosen color to all points determined by
  the smoothness conditions.

- NON Assigns the currently chosen color to all points not entering
  any smoothness conditions (those marked with square boxes).

- Menu  The menu in the fourth row provides a choice of built-in
  triangulations.  These can also be chose by hitting the function keys 
  indicated in parentheses.

    - Custom Triangulation (see below)   (F0)
    - a single triangle   (F1)
    - two neighboring triangles   (F2)
    - The Clough-Tocher split (the default)   (F3)
    - a singular vertex   (F4)   
    - a generic 4 star   (F5)
    - a generic 5 star   (F6)
    - a regular hexagon as it appears in a type I triangulation.  The
      applet recognizes this vertex as non-confinable.   (F7)
    - a regular hexagon in the traditional sense.  Because of round-off
      errors the applet does not recognize this vertex as confinable.   (F8)
    - a generic hexagon   (F9)
    - the Morgan-Scott split.   (F10)
 
  Note: susceptibility to round-off errors is the fundamental weakness
  of the applet.  A more complete discussion will be on the web pages.

- Complete  Constructs a complete minimal determining set starting
  with those that have already been chosen.


*** Fifth Row:

-   Label Vs  Toggle, shows or hides the internal numbering of the vertices.

-   Label BPs  Toggle, shows or hides the internal numbering of the Domain Points

-   quadrilaterals   toggles the drawing of the quadrilaterals
    symbolizing the smoothness conditions on and off.

-   grid   toggles the grind in each triangle on and off.

*** Sixth Row

- label  Turns a label at the bottom of the drawing window on or
  off.  That label contains a count of the points currently in the
  MDS, and a statement of the dimension of the spline space.

- Header  Turns a headline in the drawing window on or off.  The text
  of that headline can be chosen in the textfield next to the button.


Keyboard Commands

   Several Keyboard commands are available in each drawing window.
   The list below will be extended in the near future.  The idea is
   that essentially one should be able to control each drawing window
   without using the control panel at all. 

   D   increment d by 1
   d   decrement d by 1
   R   increment r by 1
   r   decrement r by 1
   0   make current color black
   1   make current color red
   2   make current color green
   3   make current color blue
   4   make current color cyan
   5   make current color magenta
   6   make current color yellow
<RET>  redraw the net
 o,O   restart
 q,Q   hide window
 x,X   exit system
 c,C   associate control panel with this window and put it on top
   .   point mode 
   @   ring mode
   #   disk mode
   $   triangle mode
F1-F10  choose a traingulation (see above)

Designing a custom triangulation

  This mode is not completely debugged, and it's a little awkward.
  But you can design your own triangulation by following these steps:

1. Select custom mode by using the menu on the control panel or by
   typing F1.

2. Draw the first triangle by moving the mouse to the intended 
   locations ov the vertices  and clicking there.

3. Add flaps by moving the mouse to the midpoint of the newly to be
   interior edge and dragging the mouse to the intended location of
   the new boundary vertex.  Once you let go of the mouse button that
   vertex cannot be moved.

4. Adding a fill by clicking on the newly to be interior vertex.

5. When you are finished with your triangulation type "f" or "F" in
   the drawing window.  You can now use this triangulation like any
   of the others.  


   Note: Currently there are no facilities to recover from a mistake
   in setting up the triangulation, or to change the location of the
   vertices.  The only option is to start over by bringing up a new
   drawing window. 











